pytest integration
==================

qtest ships as a real :mod:`pytest` plugin. Installing ``qtest`` is the
*only* thing you need to do — the plugin auto-registers via its
``pytest11`` entry point, fixtures become discoverable in every test,
and three CLI flags appear under ``pytest --help``.

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :depth: 1

CLI flags
---------

The plugin exposes three knobs that apply to the entire test session:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 25 50

   * - Flag
     - Default
     - Effect
   * - ``--qtest-shots``
     - 1024
     - Default shot count for ``qtest_backend.run`` and friends.
   * - ``--qtest-tolerance``
     - 0.05
     - Default total-variation tolerance for
       :func:`~qtest.assert_distribution_close`.
   * - ``--qtest-seed``
     - System entropy
     - Master seed for the backend RNG; identical seeds → identical
       sample sequences.

A typical CI invocation:

.. code-block:: bash

   pytest -v \
       --qtest-shots 8192 \
       --qtest-tolerance 0.02 \
       --qtest-seed 12345

You can also set those values once-per-project in ``pyproject.toml``:

.. code-block:: toml

   [tool.pytest.ini_options]
   addopts = "--qtest-shots=4096 --qtest-tolerance=0.03 --qtest-seed=42"

Built-in fixtures
-----------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 22 78

   * - Fixture
     - Yields
   * - ``qtest_backend``
     - The default :class:`~qtest.backends.Backend` instance, seeded from
       ``--qtest-seed``.
   * - ``qtest_shots``
     - The current value of ``--qtest-shots`` as an :class:`int`.
   * - ``qtest_tolerance``
     - The current value of ``--qtest-tolerance`` as a :class:`float`.
   * - ``qtest_seed``
     - The current value of ``--qtest-seed``.
   * - ``bell_circuit``
     - A 2-qubit Bell-state circuit (registered via
       :mod:`qtest.fixtures.common_states`).
   * - ``ghz_circuit``
     - A factory yielding GHZ circuits of any qubit count.
   * - ``plus_circuit``, ``minus_circuit``, ``w_circuit``
     - Single-qubit and W-state reference circuits.
   * - ``hadamards``
     - An :math:`n`-qubit all-Hadamard circuit.
   * - ``random_clifford_circuit``
     - A factory yielding seeded random Clifford circuits.

The state and gate fixtures are exposed via two plugin modules. To make
them discoverable in your suite, list them under ``pytest_plugins`` in
your top-level ``conftest.py``:

.. code-block:: python

   # tests/conftest.py
   pytest_plugins = [
       "qtest.fixtures.common_states",
       "qtest.fixtures.common_gates",
   ]

The ``qtest_backend`` fixture, the CLI flags, and the seeding fixtures
are always available — no ``pytest_plugins`` entry needed.

Using the fixtures together
---------------------------

.. code-block:: python

   from qtest import assert_distribution_close

   def test_bell_is_balanced(qtest_backend, bell_circuit, qtest_shots, qtest_tolerance):
       counts = qtest_backend.run(bell_circuit, shots=qtest_shots)
       assert_distribution_close(
           counts,
           expected={"00": 0.5, "11": 0.5},
           tolerance=qtest_tolerance,
       )

This test now respects whatever shot count and tolerance the user passed
on the command line, with sensible defaults if they passed none.

Markers
-------

qtest registers two pytest markers you can use to gate tests:

.. code-block:: python

   import pytest

   @pytest.mark.slow
   def test_high_shot_property(): ...

   @pytest.mark.hardware
   def test_real_qpu(): ...

Run only the fast tests during local development:

.. code-block:: bash

   pytest -m "not slow"

Or filter out hardware tests when you're offline:

.. code-block:: bash

   pytest -m "not hardware"

Reproducibility
---------------

The single most useful thing the plugin does for you is make runs
reproducible. When ``--qtest-seed`` is set:

1. The ``qtest_backend`` fixture seeds its RNG with that value.
2. Every fixture that constructs a *random* circuit (e.g.
   ``random_clifford_circuit``) derives its seed from the same root.
3. Hypothesis is told to use a deterministic database for any property
   tests in the session.

The net effect: a passing run on your laptop is bit-for-bit identical to
the CI run, so flakes are real flakes, not seed drift.

CI configuration recipes
------------------------

A pragmatic split:

.. code-block:: yaml

   # .github/workflows/ci.yml — excerpt
   - name: Fast tests
     run: pytest -m "not slow" --qtest-shots 1024 --qtest-tolerance 0.05

   - name: Slow tests
     run: pytest -m "slow" --qtest-shots 8192 --qtest-tolerance 0.02
     if: github.event_name == 'schedule'

PR runs stay snappy; the nightly build runs the precise, shot-heavy
properties.

Where to go next
----------------

* :doc:`writing_assertions` — the assertions these fixtures feed into.
* :doc:`property_testing` — how the slow markers and high shot counts
  play with Hypothesis profiles.
* :doc:`../api/fixtures` — the full autogenerated reference for every
  bundled fixture.
