Writing assertions
==================

qtest ships four assertions, each matched to a different question you
might ask of a quantum program. This guide explains *which* assertion to
reach for, *how* to choose a tolerance, and *what* the failure mode looks
like when something is wrong.

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :depth: 1

Picking the right assertion
---------------------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 35 35

   * - You want to check…
     - Use
     - Compare against
   * - A measurement distribution from a real run.
     - :func:`~qtest.assert_distribution_close`
     - Expected probabilities (or counts).
   * - The state vector produced by a (non-measured) circuit.
     - :func:`~qtest.assert_state_close`
     - Expected :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector`.
   * - Whether an operator is unitary at all.
     - :func:`~qtest.assert_unitary`
     - :math:`U^\dagger U \approx I`.
   * - Whether two circuits compute the same unitary.
     - :func:`~qtest.assert_circuit_equivalent`
     - Each other (up to global phase).

Statistical vs. state-vector assertions
---------------------------------------

The most common mistake new users make is comparing **measurement counts**
with strict equality, or comparing **state vectors** with statistical
tolerances. They are not interchangeable.

**Statistical assertions** — :func:`~qtest.assert_distribution_close` —
operate on shot counts produced by a real (or simulated) run. They take
shot noise into account: a distribution that is *statistically*
indistinguishable from the expected one passes, even if the raw counts
differ.

.. code-block:: python

   from qtest import assert_distribution_close

   # ``assert_distribution_close`` runs the circuit internally on
   # qtest's default backend — you pass the circuit, not pre-computed
   # counts.
   assert_distribution_close(
       qc, expected={"0": 0.5, "1": 0.5}, shots=4096, tolerance=0.03
   )

**State-vector assertions** — :func:`~qtest.assert_state_close` — work on
exact :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` objects. They support
named reference states (``"plus"``, ``"minus"``, ``"bell"``, …) and are
phase-insensitive by default. Use them for tight, unambiguous gate-level
tests where you don't want shot-noise variance.

.. code-block:: python

   from qtest import assert_state_close

   # Pass the circuit directly — qtest computes the state vector for
   # you. Named reference states make tight, readable gate tests.
   assert_state_close(qc, expected_state="plus", tolerance=1e-10)

Choosing a tolerance
--------------------

The right tolerance depends on which assertion you're using:

* **Distribution tolerance** is the maximum total-variation distance you
  will accept. With :math:`N` shots, the natural floor is
  :math:`\mathcal{O}(1/\sqrt{N})` — at 4096 shots, ``tolerance=0.03`` is
  a reasonable, lightly-conservative default. The helper
  :func:`qtest.metrics.auto_tolerance` will compute one for you given a
  shot count and a target false-positive rate.

* **State / unitary tolerance** is a hard numerical bound. ``1e-10`` is
  appropriate when comparing against an analytically known state on a
  noiseless simulator; ``1e-6`` is reasonable when noise or finite
  precision is in the loop.

* When in doubt, **start strict and loosen on failure** rather than the
  reverse. A test that passes with ``tolerance=0.5`` is barely testing
  anything.

Failure messages
----------------

qtest assertions raise :class:`AssertionError` with a structured message
that reports the metric value, the tolerance, and (where useful) the
top-contributing offending outcomes. For example:

.. code-block::

   AssertionError: distribution mismatch
     metric:    total_variation_distance
     observed:  0.0871
     tolerance: 0.030
     worst offenders:
       "00": observed=0.612, expected=0.500
       "11": observed=0.388, expected=0.500

That is by design: when a test fails in CI, the message alone should be
enough to diagnose whether the failure is a real bug, a tolerance that
is too tight, or a shot count that is too low.

Global-phase insensitivity
--------------------------

Two state vectors :math:`\lvert\psi\rangle` and
:math:`e^{i\theta}\lvert\psi\rangle` are physically identical — every
measurement on them returns the same statistics. qtest's state and
unitary assertions are global-phase-insensitive by default, computing
:math:`1 - |\langle\psi_1|\psi_2\rangle|^2` (infidelity) rather than the
raw L2 distance. Pass ``global_phase=False`` to
:func:`~qtest.assert_state_close` if you really do care about phase.

Where to go next
----------------

* :doc:`property_testing` — turn the rules above into Hypothesis
  properties that hold over many random circuits.
* :doc:`pytest_integration` — wire these assertions into a real pytest
  configuration with shared fixtures, markers, and CLI flags.
* :doc:`../api/assertions` — the full autogenerated API reference for
  every assertion.
