Quickstart
==========

This page walks you from a fresh install to four passing quantum tests in
under five minutes. Every snippet here is a real test you can copy into a
file and run with ``pytest``.

Install qtest
-------------

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install qtest

That gives you the assertions, the pytest plugin, and the Qiskit backend.
If you want Hypothesis-driven property tests, install the extra:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install "qtest[hypothesis]"

Your first quantum test
-----------------------

A Bell state should produce a 50/50 distribution over ``00`` and ``11``.
``assert_distribution_close`` knows about shot noise — you give it a
tolerance, not an exact count.

.. code-block:: python

   # test_bell.py
   from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
   from qtest import assert_distribution_close

   def test_bell_state_is_balanced():
       qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
       qc.h(0)
       qc.cx(0, 1)
       qc.measure_all()

       assert_distribution_close(
           qc,
           expected={"00": 0.5, "11": 0.5},
           shots=4096,
           tolerance=0.03,
       )

Run it:

.. code-block:: bash

   pytest test_bell.py -v

No mocking, no manual backend setup — ``assert_distribution_close``
runs the circuit on qtest's default backend internally, with the seed
and tolerance configured via the pytest plugin's CLI flags.

Asserting on state vectors
--------------------------

For unit tests of single gates, state-vector comparisons are sharper than
sampling. :func:`qtest.assert_state_close` handles global phase for you.

.. code-block:: python

   from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
   from qtest import assert_state_close

   def test_hadamard_produces_plus_state():
       qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
       qc.h(0)

       # Named reference states ("plus", "minus", "bell", ...) are
       # built in. Global phase is ignored by default.
       assert_state_close(qc, expected_state="plus", tolerance=1e-10)

Verifying that two circuits are equivalent
------------------------------------------

When you refactor a circuit — say, replacing a sub-routine with an
optimised version — you want to confirm it still implements the same
unitary up to global phase.

.. code-block:: python

   from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
   from qtest import assert_circuit_equivalent

   def test_two_cnot_decompositions_are_equivalent():
       qc1 = QuantumCircuit(2)
       qc1.cx(0, 1)

       qc2 = QuantumCircuit(2)
       qc2.h(1)
       qc2.cz(0, 1)
       qc2.h(1)

       assert_circuit_equivalent(qc1, qc2, tolerance=1e-10)

Property-based testing with Hypothesis
--------------------------------------

Real quantum tests aren't just "this circuit produces this output" — they
encode invariants. Hypothesis lets you assert those invariants over many
random circuits at once.

.. code-block:: python

   from hypothesis import given, settings
   from qtest import assert_unitary
   from qtest.strategies import quantum_circuits

   @given(circuit=quantum_circuits(min_qubits=2, max_qubits=4, max_depth=8))
   @settings(deadline=None, max_examples=50)
   def test_any_unitary_circuit_is_unitary(circuit):
       assert_unitary(circuit, tolerance=1e-9)

That single test executes against dozens of random unitary circuits per
run. When it fails, Hypothesis shrinks the failing circuit to the
smallest reproducer — which is exactly what you want when debugging a
gate-level bug.

Configuring the plugin from the command line
--------------------------------------------

The pytest plugin exposes three flags that apply to every test in the
session:

.. code-block:: bash

   pytest -v \
       --qtest-shots 8192 \
       --qtest-tolerance 0.02 \
       --qtest-seed 12345

This is how you tune CI: higher shot counts and tighter tolerances on
nightly runs, faster defaults on PR runs. See
:doc:`guides/pytest_integration` for the full configuration model.

Next steps
----------

* :doc:`guides/writing_assertions` — the full assertion API and when to
  use each variant.
* :doc:`guides/property_testing` — how to design property tests around
  quantum invariants.
* :doc:`guides/pytest_integration` — fixtures, CLI flags, markers, and
  reporting.
* :doc:`api/assertions` — autogenerated API reference.
